Allergies can be challenging to deal with, but by understanding your allergies’ triggers and causes, you can learn how to deal with and prevent your allergies from happening before they start.

Whether seasonal or year-round, treatment options are available if you find yourself dealing with an allergy attack.

Nasal sprays, antihistamines, and staying clean are just some allergy tips to help mitigate your symptoms, allowing you to live a more comfortable allergy-free life.

What Causes Allergies?

Allergies are caused when your body is exposed to something that it thinks is harmful.

This “harmful” substance triggers an immune response in the body, which results in symptoms like coughing, shortness of breath, or sneezing.

The most common allergens are pollen, dust mites, mold spores, milk and pet dander.

When exposed to these substances, histamine gets released into the bloodstream by a type of white blood cell called mast cells.

Histamine causes inflammation and leads to allergy symptoms such as a runny nose and watery eyes.

Food allergies are slightly different because a food allergy is an immune response to certain proteins found in specific foods.

The most common food allergens are peanuts, shellfish, eggs, and fish.

Food allergies are typically caused by an error in the immune system that recognizes proteins found in certain foods as a threat.

Common food allergy symptoms are stomach pain, diarrhea, vomiting, trouble breathing, and hives.

How to Prevent Allergies: 5 Allergy Tips

Some of the best ways to prevent environmental allergies are by staying indoors during high-pollen days, using an air purifier in your home, and washing sheets weekly.

Also, make sure you always have medicine on hand for when allergy symptoms strike.

At-home treatment options include antihistamines or nasal sprays that can relieve some allergy symptoms like sneezing and a runny nose.

Having to deal with allergies can be a real pain.

However, with the proper treatment and lifestyle changes, you can find yourself living free from the uncomfortable symptoms of allergies.

The following allergy tips may help you find relief from your symptoms.

Use Antihistamines.

When suffering from allergy symptoms, taking over-the-counter antihistamines might be the answer, but did you know that you can take antihistamines before your allergies even start? By taking allergy pills, you can prevent allergy symptoms before they even begin.

Nasal Treatments.

Sometimes we catch ourselves in the middle of an allergy attack before it’s too late. If you are experiencing allergy symptoms, using a nasal spray can be a quick solution to finding relief.

Using a neti pot can also help you find relief from your allergies.

Neti pots work by pushing a flow of saline solution through your nasal passages to thin out the mucus and clear out any allergens trapped inside.

Drink Plenty of Fluids.

When trying to cope with allergies, hot fluids like soup, broth, or teas can also help provide relief by thinning out the mucus in your nasal passages and loosening up congestion.

Be sure to drink plenty of water, as this will also help relieve your allergy symptoms. Avoid drinking any alcoholic beverages as it might worsen your symptoms.

Stay Clean.

Taking a hot shower after being outside can help wash away any potential allergens that might be trapped on your skin or hair.

Taking a hot shower also has an added benefit in that the hot steam from the shower can help open up your airways and clear out any congestion.

Visit Northeast Allergy.

One of the best allergy tips we have is to see an allergist. Northeast Allergy offers allergy testing to get a better understanding of what you are allergic to and what to avoid.

If home remedies like nasal sprays and saline solutions aren’t working, Northeast Allergy has treatments to help you cope with your allergy symptoms and find relief.

Spring means flower buds and blooming trees — and if you're one of the millions of people who have seasonal allergies, it also means sneezing, congestion, a runny nose and other bothersome symptoms. Seasonal allergies — also called hay fever and allergic rhinitis — can make you miserable.

But before you settle for plastic flowers and artificial turf, try these simple strategies to keep seasonal allergies under control.

Reduce your exposure to allergy triggers

To reduce your exposure to the things that trigger your allergy signs and symptoms (allergens):

Stay indoors on dry, windy days. The best time to go outside is after a good rain, which helps clear pollen from the air.

Avoid lawn mowing, weed pulling and other gardening chores that stir up allergens.

Remove clothes you've worn outside and shower to rinse pollen from your skin and hair.

Don't hang laundry outside — pollen can stick to sheets and towels.

Wear a face mask if you do outside chores.

Take extra steps when pollen counts are high

Seasonal allergy signs and symptoms can flare up when there's a lot of pollen in the air. These steps can help you reduce your exposure:

Check your local TV or radio station, your local newspaper, or the internet for pollen forecasts and current pollen levels.

If high pollen counts are forecasted, start taking allergy medications before your symptoms start.

Close doors and windows at night if possible or any other time when pollen counts are high.

Avoid outdoor activity in the early morning when pollen counts are highest.

Keep indoor air clean

There's no miracle product that can eliminate all allergens from the air in your home, but these suggestions may help:

Use air conditioning in your house and car.

If you have forced air heating or air conditioning in your house, use high-efficiency filters and follow regular maintenance schedules.

Keep indoor air dry with a dehumidifier.

Use a portable high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter in your bedroom.

Clean floors often with a vacuum cleaner that has a HEPA filter.

Try an over-the-counter remedy

Several types of nonprescription medications can help ease allergy symptoms. They include:

Oral antihistamines. Antihistamines can help relieve sneezing, itching, a stuffy or runny nose, and watery eyes.

Examples of oral antihistamines include cetirizine (Zyrtec Allergy), fexofenadine (Allegra Allergy) and loratadine (Claritin, Alavert).

Corticosteroid nasal sprays. These medications improve nasal symptoms.

Examples include fluticasone propionate (Flonase Allergy Relief), budesonide (Rhinocort Allergy) and triamcinolone (Nasacort Allergy 24 Hour).

Talk to your health care provider about long-term use of corticosteroid nasal sprays.

Cromolyn sodium nasal spray. This nasal spray can ease allergy symptoms by blocking the release of immune system agents that cause symptoms.

It works best if treatment is started before exposure to allergens.

It's considered a very safe treatment, but it usually needs to be used 4 to 6 times daily.

Oral decongestants.

Oral decongestants such as pseudoephedrine (Sudafed) can provide temporary relief from nasal stuffiness.

Some allergy medications combine an antihistamine with a decongestant. Examples include cetirizine-pseudoephedrine (Zyrtec-D 12 Hour), fexofenadine-pseudoephedrine (Allegra-D 12 Hour Allergy and Congestion) and loratadine-pseudoephedrine (Claritin-D).

Talk to your health care provider about whether the use of a decongestant is good for treating your allergy symptoms.

Rinse your sinuses

Rinsing your nasal passages with saline solution (nasal irrigation) is a quick, inexpensive and effective way to relieve nasal congestion.

Rinsing directly flushes out mucus and allergens from your nose.

Saline solutions can be purchased ready-made or as kits to add to water.

If you use a kit or home-made saline solution, use bottled water to reduce the risk of infection.

Homemade solutions should have 1 quart (1 liter) of water, 1.5 teaspoons (7.5 milliliters) of canning salt and 1 teaspoon (5 milliliters) of baking soda.

Rinse the irrigation device after each use with clean water and leave open to air-dry.

Alternative treatments

A number of natural remedies have been used to treat hay fever symptoms.

Treatments that may improve symptoms include extracts of the shrub butterbur, spirulina (a type of dried algae) and other herbal remedies.

Based on the limited number of well-designed clinical trials, there is not enough evidence to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of these remedies.

Results of studies of acupuncture have shown possible limited benefit, but the results of studies have been mixed.

Talk to your doctor before trying alternative treatments.

When home remedies aren't enough

For many people, avoiding allergens and taking nonprescription medications is enough to ease symptoms.

But if your seasonal allergies are still bothersome, don't give up. A number of other treatments are available.

If you have bad seasonal allergies, your health care provider may recommend that you have skin tests or blood tests to find out exactly what allergens trigger your symptoms.

Testing can help determine what steps you need to take to avoid your specific triggers and identify which treatments are likely to work best for you.

For some people, allergy shots (allergen immunotherapy) can be a good option.

Also known as desensitization, this treatment involves regular injections containing tiny amounts of the substances that cause your allergies.

Over time, these injections reduce the immune system reaction that causes symptoms.

For some allergies, treatment can be given as tablets under the tongue.